[Workers] WebSocket docs (#1086)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: products/workers/src/content/learning/using-websockets.md

<Aside>WebSockets utilize a simple event-based system for receiving and sending messages, much like the Workers' runtime model of responding to events.</Aside>

## Writing a WebSocket Server

WebSocket servers in Cloudflare Workers allow you to receive messages from a client in real-time. This brief guide will show you how to set up a WebSocket server in Workers.

A client can make a WebSocket request in the browser by instantiating a new instance of `WebSocket`, passing in the URL for your Workers function:

```js
const websocket = new WebSocket("wss://example-websocket.signalnerve.workers.dev)
```

<Aside>
For more details about creating and working with WebSockets in the client, see "Writing a WebSocket client".
</Aside>

When an incoming WebSocket request reaches the Workers function, it will contain an `Upgrade` header, set to the string value `websocket`. Check for this header before continuing to instantiate a WebSocket:

```js
async function handleRequest(request) {
  const upgradeHeader = request.headers.get("Upgrade")

>   if (!upgradeHeader || upgradeHeader !== "websocket") {
>     return new Response("Expected websocket", { status: 400 })
>   }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if (upgradeHeader !== "websocket") {
    return new Response("Expected Upgrade: websocket", { status: 426 })
  }
```
Standard to return a `426` status code: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/426

    return new Response("Expected websocket", { status: 400 })
  }

  const webSocketPair = new WebSocketPair()
  const client, server = webSocketPair[0], webSocketPair[1]

  return new Response(null, {
    status: 101,
    webSocket: client
  })
}
```

<Aside>
The WebsocketPair returned from this constructor is an Object, with two WebSockets at keys `0` and `1`. It's common to grab the two WebSockets from this pair using `Object.values` and ES6 destructuring, as seen in the below example:

```js
let [client, server] = Object.values(new WebsocketPair())
```
</Aside>

With your `client` Websocket returned back to the client, you now need to handle the `server` WebSocket. To begin receiving messages on your Workers function, call `accept` on the `server` WebSocket:

```js
const [client, server] = Object.values(new WebSocketPair())
server.accept()
```

WebSockets emit a number of [Events](/workers/runtime-apis/websockets#events) that can be connected to using `addEventListener`. In the below example, we hook into the `message` event and emit a `console.log` with the data from it:

```js
server.addEventListener("message", message => {

>   console.log(message.data)

Reviewer: What is the class of `message.data` here?

})
```

## Writing a WebSocket Client

Writing WebSocket clients that communicate with your Workers function is a two-step process: first, create the WebSocket instance, and then attach events to it, just like we did on the server:

```js
const websocket = new WebSocket("wss://websocket-example.signalnerve.workers.dev)
websocket.addEventListener("message", message => {
  console.log("Message received from server")
  console.log(message.data)
})
```

For an example of this in practice, see the [`websocket-template`](https://github.com/cloudflare/websocket-template) that we provide to get started with WebSockets. 

## Durable Objects and WebSocket state

> WebSockets are effectively stateless, meaning that they can't practically be used for full applications or anything that requires broader coordination of states between clients. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your application needs to coordinate among multiple WebSocket connections, such as a chat room or game match, you'll need to create a Durable Object so clients send messages to a single-point-of-coordination. 
```

```js
async function handleRequest(request) {
  const upgradeHeader = request.headers.get("Upgrade")
  if (!upgradeHeader || upgradeHeader !== "websocket") {
    return new Response("Expected Upgrade: websocket", { status: 426 })
  }
}
```

Once you've appropriately checked for the `Upgrade` header, you can create a new instance of WebSocketPair, which contains _server_ and _client_ WebSockets. One of these WebSockets should be handled by the Workers function (which we'll do shortly), and the other should be returned as part of a `Response` with status 101, indicating the "Switching protocols" response:

```js
async function handleRequest(request) {
  const upgradeHeader = request.headers.get("Upgrade")
  if (!upgradeHeader || upgradeHeader !== "websocket") {
    return new Response("Expected Upgrade: websocket", { status: 426 })
  }

  const webSocketPair = new WebSocketPair()
  const client, server = webSocketPair[0], webSocketPair[1]

  return new Response(null, {
    status: 101,
    webSocket: client
  })
}
```

> The WebsocketPair returned from this constructor is an Object, with two WebSockets at keys `0` and `1`. It's common to grab the two WebSockets from this pair using `Object.values` and ES6 destructuring, as seen in the below example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An Object is returned from the `WebSocketPair` constructor, with the `0` and `1` keys each holding a WebSocket value. It's common to grab the two WebSockets from this pair using [`Object.values`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_objects/Object/values) and [ES6 destructuring](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment), as seen in the below example.
```

With your `client` Websocket returned back to the client, you now need to handle the `server` WebSocket. To begin receiving messages on your Workers function, call `accept` on the `server` WebSocket:

```js
const [client, server] = Object.values(new WebSocketPair())
server.accept()
```

WebSockets emit a number of [Events](/workers/runtime-apis/websockets#events) that can be connected to using `addEventListener`. In the below example, we hook into the `message` event and emit a `console.log` with the data from it:

```js
server.addEventListener("message", message => {
  console.log(message)
})
```

## Writing a WebSocket Client

Writing WebSocket clients that communicate with your Workers function is a two-step process: first, create the WebSocket instance, and then attach event listeners to it, just like we did on the server:

```js

> const websocket = new WebSocket("wss://websocket-example.signalnerve.workers.dev)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
const websocket = new WebSocket("wss://websocket-example.signalnerve.workers.dev")
```

> websocket.addEventListener("message", message => {
>   console.log("Message received from server")
>   console.log(message)
> })

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
websocket.addEventListener("message", event => {
  console.log("Message received from server")
  console.log(event.data)
})
```

## Writing a WebSocket Server

WebSocket servers in Cloudflare Workers allow you to receive messages from a client in real-time. This brief guide will show you how to set up a WebSocket server in Workers.

A client can make a WebSocket request in the browser by instantiating a new instance of `WebSocket`, passing in the URL for your Workers function:

```js
// In client-side JavaScript, connect to your Workers function using WebSockets
const websocket = new WebSocket("wss://example-websocket.signalnerve.workers.dev")
```

<Aside>
For more details about creating and working with WebSockets in the client, see <a href="#writing-a-websocket-client">"Writing a WebSocket client"</a>.
</Aside>

When an incoming WebSocket request reaches the Workers function, it will contain an `Upgrade` header, set to the string value `websocket`. Check for this header before continuing to instantiate a WebSocket:

```js
async function handleRequest(request) {
  const upgradeHeader = request.headers.get("Upgrade")
  if (!upgradeHeader || upgradeHeader !== "websocket") {
    return new Response("Expected Upgrade: websocket", { status: 426 })
  }
}
```

> Once you've appropriately checked for the `Upgrade` header, you can create a new instance of WebSocketPair, which contains _server_ and _client_ WebSockets. One of these WebSockets should be handled by the Workers function (which we'll do shortly), and the other should be returned as part of a `Response` with status 101, indicating the "Switching protocols" response:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you've appropriately checked for the `Upgrade` header, you can create a new instance of `WebSocketPair`, which contains _server_ and _client_ WebSockets. One of these WebSockets should be handled by the Workers function (which we'll do shortly), and the other should be returned as part of a `Response` with status 101, indicating the "Switching protocols" response:
```

```js
async function handleRequest(request) {
  const upgradeHeader = request.headers.get("Upgrade")
  if (!upgradeHeader || upgradeHeader !== "websocket") {
    return new Response("Expected Upgrade: websocket", { status: 426 })
  }

  const webSocketPair = new WebSocketPair()

>   const client, server = webSocketPair[0], webSocketPair[1]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  const client = webSocketPair[0], server = webSocketPair[1]
```

  return new Response(null, {
    status: 101,
    webSocket: client
  })
}
```

> An Object is returned from the `WebSocketPair` constructor, with the `0` and `1` keys each holding a WebSocket value. It's common to grab the two WebSockets from this pair using [`Object.values`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_objects/Object/values) and [ES6 destructuring](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment), as seen in the below example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An Object is returned from the `WebSocketPair` constructor, with the `0` and `1` keys each holding a `WebSocket` instance as its value. It's common to grab the two WebSockets from this pair using [`Object.values`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_objects/Object/values) and [ES6 destructuring](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment), as seen in the below example.
```

const websocket = new WebSocket("wss://example-websocket.signalnerve.workers.dev")
```

<Aside>
For more details about creating and working with WebSockets in the client, see <a href="#writing-a-websocket-client">"Writing a WebSocket client"</a>.
</Aside>

When an incoming WebSocket request reaches the Workers function, it will contain an `Upgrade` header, set to the string value `websocket`. Check for this header before continuing to instantiate a WebSocket:

```js
async function handleRequest(request) {
  const upgradeHeader = request.headers.get("Upgrade")
  if (upgradeHeader !== "websocket") {
    return new Response("Expected Upgrade: websocket", { status: 426 })
  }
}
```

Once you've appropriately checked for the `Upgrade` header, you can create a new instance of WebSocketPair, which contains _server_ and _client_ WebSockets. One of these WebSockets should be handled by the Workers function (which we'll do shortly), and the other should be returned as part of a `Response` with status 101, indicating the "Switching protocols" response:

```js
async function handleRequest(request) {
  const upgradeHeader = request.headers.get("Upgrade")

>   if (!upgradeHeader || upgradeHeader !== "websocket") {

Author: great catch, added in other code snippet

    return new Response("Expected Upgrade: websocket", { status: 426 })
  }

  const webSocketPair = new WebSocketPair()
  const client, server = webSocketPair[0], webSocketPair[1]

  return new Response(null, {
    status: 101,
    webSocket: client
  })
}
```

The WebsocketPair returned from this constructor is an Object, with two WebSockets at keys `0` and `1`. It's common to grab the two WebSockets from this pair using `Object.values` and ES6 destructuring, as seen in the below example.

> With your `client` Websocket returned back to the client, you now need to handle the `server` WebSocket. To begin receiving messages on your Workers function, call `accept` on the `server` WebSocket:

Reviewer 2: Agree with this. Should `server.accept()` be invoked immediately, or is there a point in time where it becomes safe to do so?
